# Cervical_Cancer_ML_Project
Being the fourth most common malignancy in females worldwide, cervical cancer poses a global health challenge. It is estimated 570 000 women were diagnosed with cervical cancer in 2018, resulting in about 311,000 deaths worldwide. This notwithstanding, the cancer is largely preventable as 90% of the cases occur in low-income and middle-income countries that lack organised screening and HPV vaccination programmes. Most women with early-stage tumours can be cured. Nevertheless, long-term morbidity is typical. 

Cervical cancer starts in the cell linings in the cervix. The cervix connects the upper part of the vagina to the lower part of the uterus. The opening of the cervix, endocervix, is made of glandular cells. The outer part of the cervix is the exocervix. The epithelium of the exocervix is composed of stratified squamous cells. The further they are from the basal membrane, the more differentiated they are. The base membrane houses stem cells, which mature into squamous epithelium cells and migrate further away. 

Machine Learning in healthcare can be applied to digitally prognose (predictive diagnosis) using the risk factors of a disease. ML can detect patterns of certain diseases with patient electronic health records and report anomalies to the pattern. ML Diagnostic applications are increasingly being used to supplement clinicians’ decisions, using data lakes to condensify millions of observations of diseases. To instantiate the power of machine learning as a medical prognostic tool, I examined its use in cervical cancer to classify one’s risk of having it, using risk factors, using a publicly available Cervical Cancer Risk Classification Data Set.

This data set consists of several instances of tumors. Tumors can either be benign (non-cancerous) or malignant (cancerous). Benign tumors grow locally and do not spread. As a result, they are not considered cancerous. However, they can still pose a danger, especially if they press against vital organs like the brain. Malignant tumors, in contrast, have the ability to spread and invade other tissues. This process, known as metastasis, is a key feature of cancer. There are many different types of malignancy-based tumors as well as locations that this type of cancer tumor can originate, as described in the data set specification.
The cervical cancer data set consists of 858 tumor samples where 55(6.4%) are benign (non-cancer) tumors and 803(93.6%) malignant (cancer) tumors.
From the results, it becomes clear that even though the accuracy of all models is pretty high, the F1 scores are not that good. With perhaps more data, the algorithms will be able to perform better — improving their F1 scores too. Nevertheless, out of the models tested, the Decision tree has the highest accuracy (95.08%) and F1 score (69.4%), making it the best model.

These models have shown moderate results on Cervical Cancer Risk Classification Data Set. In order to trust the models, we need to further test them with new data and make sure they are leading to excellent results. One possible weakness associated with these models is that they do not include any demography, race, and genetic sequences attributes and other useful information that could potentially strengthen the ground for classification. 

One last note of caution: although the approaches outlined in this article may show promising results, the intention was to demonstrate the potential of AI algorithms, it was not intended for clinical use.
I have explained the entire code in an article: https://medium.com/swlh/using-machine-learning-to-prognose-cervical-cancer-a-step-by-step-guide-c8ea0d77122b

